README.md, before:

# IsoRefiner
IsoRefiner is a refinement tool to identify exon-intron structures of transcript (RNA) isoforms using long reads. It employs multiple transcript-identification tools, filters erroneous structures, merges results from the tools, and constructs the final dataset including novel transcript structures. Its inputs are long reads and reference data (genome and annotation), and it outputs a refined dataset (GTF file). We tested IsoRefiner using Oxford Nanopore cDNA reads, although it can potentially accept other types of reads such as PacBio. We have submitted a paper describing the IsoRefiner algorithm, and it is under review.

## Installation
```bash
git clone https://github.com/rkajitani/IsoRefiner.git
cd IsoRefiner
conda env create -f conda.yml -n isorefiner_env
conda activate isorefiner_env
pip install .
```
We tested IsoRefiner on **Linux x86_64** environments. [Miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/) is utilized in this procedure. After installation success, you can run the `isorefiner` command in a virtual environment named `isorefiner_env`.
### Dependency
Required tools are listed in the [YAML file for conda](conda.yml). All of the required bioinformatics tools can be installed through the [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/) channel.

## Test
```bash
cd test/isorefiner
bash cmd.sh
```
A dataset and script are in the [test](test) directory. If you succeed in a test, `isorefiner_refined.gtf` is output. The test dataset was generated by a simulator, [SQANTI-SIM](https://github.com/ConesaLab/SQANTI-SIM).

## Quick start
```bash
isorefiner trans_struct_wf -r reads.fastq -g genome.fasta -a ref_annot.gtf -t 32
```
Above, IsoRefiner executes a workflow to refine transcript structures. Its subcommands are used internally. `reads.fastq` is a file of input long reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed). Multiple files can be specified as space-delimited string (e.g., "reads_1.fastq reads_2.fastq"). `genome.fasta` and `ref_annot.gtf` are the reference genome and annotation, respectively. The number of threads (parallelization) is `32` in this command. Final result is `isorefiner_refined.gtf`.

## Workflow command usage
The command below runs an end-to-end workflow, which uses [subcommands](#command-usage-for-each-step) internally. Although detailed parameters for internal steps can not be specified, it is convenient to run the workflow without preparing a complex shell-script. Intermediate files are in the directory named `isorefiner_{command}_work` (default) or `-d argument`, and a log file named `log.txt` is created in the same directory.
#
### trans_struct_wf
Workflow of transcript-structure refinement.
```
isorefiner trans_struct_wf [-h] -r [READS ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_refined.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_trans_struct_wf_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)

output: isorefiner_refined.gtf (-o argument)
```

## Command usage for each step
Each command below corresponds to a specific step used in the workflow. When specifing detailed parameters, it is suitable to execute these commands directly with options. The example step-by-step procedures are written in [step_by_step.sh](test/isorefiner/step_by_step.sh). Intermediate files are in the directory named `isorefiner_{command}_work` (default) or `-d argument`, and a log file named `log.txt` is created in the same directory.
### trim
Trim nanopore reads using [Porechop_ABI](https://github.com/bonsai-team/Porechop_ABI).
```
isorefiner trim [-h] -r [READS ...] [-o OUT_PREFIX] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-p TOOL_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_PREFIX, --out_prefix OUT_PREFIX
                        Prefix of final output files (extentions are those of input files) (default: isorefiner_trimmed)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_trim_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -p TOOL_OPTION, --tool_option TOOL_OPTION
                        Option for Porechomp_ABI (quoted string) (default: )

output: isorefiner_trimmed.fastq ({-o argument}.fastq)
  When multiple input files, isorefiner_trimmed_1.fastq isorefiner_trimmed_2.fastq ...
  File extentions are inherited from the input files.
```

### map
Map reads to the reference genome using [Minimap2](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2), and sort BAM files.
```
isorefiner map [-h] -r [READS ...] -g GENOME [-o OUT_PREFIX] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-m MM2_OPTION] [-s SORT_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_PREFIX, --out_prefix OUT_PREFIX
                        Prefix of output BAM files (default: isorefiner_mapped)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_map_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -m MM2_OPTION, --mm2_option MM2_OPTION
                        Option for minimap2 (quoted string) (default: -x splice -ub -k14 --secondary=no)
  -s SORT_OPTION, --sort_option SORT_OPTION
                        Option for samtools sort (quoted string) (default: -m 2G)

output: isorefiner_mapped.bam ({-o argument}.bam)
  When multiple input files, isorefiner_mapped_1.bam isorefiner_mapped_2.bam ...
```

### run_bambu
Run [Bambu](https://github.com/GoekeLab/bambu) (read mapping-based tool).
```
isorefiner run_bambu [-h] -b [BAM ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -b [BAM ...], --bam [BAM ...]
                        Mapped reads files (BAM, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_bambu.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_bambu_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)

output: isorefiner_bambu.gtf (-o argument)
```

### run_espresso
Run [ESPRESSO](https://github.com/Xinglab/espresso) (read mapping-based tool).
```
isorefiner run_espresso [-h] -b [BAM ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-s TOOL_S_OPTION] [-c TOOL_C_OPTION] [-q TOOL_Q_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -b [BAM ...], --bam [BAM ...]
                        Mapped reads files (BAM, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_espresso.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_espresso_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -s TOOL_S_OPTION, --tool_s_option TOOL_S_OPTION
                        Option for ESPRESSO_S.pl (quoted string) (default: )
  -c TOOL_C_OPTION, --tool_c_option TOOL_C_OPTION
                        Option for ESPRESSO_C.pl (quoted string) (default: )
  -q TOOL_Q_OPTION, --tool_q_option TOOL_Q_OPTION
                        Option for ESPRESSO_Q.pl (quoted string) (default: )

output: isorefiner_espresso.gtf (-o argument)
```

### run_isoquant
Run [IsoQuant](https://github.com/ablab/IsoQuant) (read mapping-based tool).
```
isorefiner run_isoquant [-h] -b [BAM ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-p TOOL_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -b [BAM ...], --bam [BAM ...]
                        Mapped reads files (BAM, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_isoquant.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_isoquant_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -p TOOL_OPTION, --tool_option TOOL_OPTION
                        Option for isoquant (quoted string) (default: --complete_genedb --data_type nanopore --stranded none --transcript_quantification unique_only
                        --gene_quantification unique_only --matching_strategy default --splice_correction_strategy default_ont --model_construction_strategy default_ont
                        --no_secondary --check_canonical --count_exons)

output: isorefiner_isoquant.gtf (-o argument)
```

### run_stringtie
Run [StringTie](https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/stringtie/) (read mapping-based tool).
```
isorefiner run_stringtie [-h] -b [BAM ...] [-g GENOME] -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-p TOOL_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -b [BAM ...], --bam [BAM ...]
                        Mapped reads files (BAM, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_stringtie.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_stringtie_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -p TOOL_OPTION, --tool_option TOOL_OPTION
                        Option for StringTie (quoted string) (default: )

output: isorefiner_stringtie.gtf (-o argument)
```

### run_rnabloom
Run [RNA-Bloom](https://github.com/bcgsc/RNA-Bloom) (de novo assembly-based tool) and GMAP (contig mapping).
```
isorefiner run_rnabloom [-h] -r [READS ...] [-g GENOME] [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [--max_mem MAX_MEM] [--rnabloom_option RNABLOOM_OPTION]
                               [--gmap_min_cov GMAP_MIN_COV] [--gmap_min_idt GMAP_MIN_IDT] [--gmap_max_intron GMAP_MAX_INTRON] [--gmap_option GMAP_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_rnabloom.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_rnabloom_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  --max_mem MAX_MEM     Max memory for RNA-Bloom (java -Xmx) (default: 400g)
  --rnabloom_option RNABLOOM_OPTION
                        Option for RNA-Bloom (quoted string) (default: )
  --gmap_min_cov GMAP_MIN_COV
                        Min alignment coverage for GMAP [0-1] (default: 0.5)
  --gmap_min_idt GMAP_MIN_IDT
                        Min identity for GMAP [0-1] (default: 0.95)
  --gmap_max_intron GMAP_MAX_INTRON
                        Max intron length for GMAP (bp) (default: 100000)
  --gmap_option GMAP_OPTION
                        Option for GMAP (quoted string) (default: -n 1 --no-chimeras)

output: isorefiner_stringtie.gtf (-o argument)
```

### filter
Filter transcript isoforms (GTF format).
```
isorefiner filter [-h] -i INPUT_GTF -r [READS ...] -g GENOME [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [--max_indel MAX_INDEL] [--max_clip MAX_CLIP] [--min_idt MIN_IDT]
                         [--min_cov MIN_COV] [--min_mean_depth MIN_MEAN_DEPTH]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i INPUT_GTF, --input_gtf INPUT_GTF
                        Input transcript isoform structures (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_filtered.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_filter_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  --max_indel MAX_INDEL
                        Max indel for read mapping (default: 20)
  --max_clip MAX_CLIP   Max clip (unaligned) length for read mapping (default: 200)
  --min_idt MIN_IDT     Min identity for read mapping [0-1] (default: 0.9)
  --min_cov MIN_COV     Min coverage for filtering [0-1] (default: 0.95)
  --min_mean_depth MIN_MEAN_DEPTH
                        Min mean coverage depth for filtering (default: 1.0)

output: isorefiner_filtered.gtf (-o argument)
```

### refine
Merge and refine transcript isoforms.
```
refine [-h] -i [INPUT_GTF ...] -r [READS ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [--max_indel MAX_INDEL] [--max_clip MAX_CLIP]
                         [--min_idt MIN_IDT] [--intron_dist_th INTRON_DIST_TH]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i [INPUT_GTF ...], --input_gtf [INPUT_GTF ...]
                        Input transcript isoform structures (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_refined.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_refine_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  --max_indel MAX_INDEL
                        Max indel for read mapping (default: 20)
  --max_clip MAX_CLIP   Max clip (unaligned) length for read mapping (default: 200)
  --min_idt MIN_IDT     Min identity for read mapping [0-1] (default: 0.9)
  --intron_dist_th INTRON_DIST_TH
                        Intron distance threshold to exclude erroneous isoforms (default: 20)

output: isorefiner_refined.gtf (-o argument)
```

Commit message:

Update README.md to describe the installation with Bioconda.

README.md, after:

# IsoRefiner
IsoRefiner is a refinement tool to identify exon-intron structures of transcript (RNA) isoforms using long reads. It employs multiple transcript-identification tools, filters erroneous structures, merges results from the tools, and constructs the final dataset including novel transcript structures. Its inputs are long reads and reference data (genome and annotation), and it outputs a refined dataset (GTF file). We tested IsoRefiner using Oxford Nanopore cDNA reads, although it can potentially accept other types of reads such as PacBio. We have submitted a paper describing the IsoRefiner algorithm, and it is under review.

## Installation
We tested IsoRefiner on **Linux x86_64** environments. After installation, you can execute `isorefiner` command.
### Miniconda
```bash
conda install -y -c conda-forge -c bioconda isorefiner
```
[Miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/) is utilized. It may take a long time to solve dependencies, and you can [mamba](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/mamba) instead of `conda` to reduce the time.  
Alternatively, you can install it and create a virtual environment simultaneously:
```bash
conda create -y -c conda-forge -c bioconda -n isorefiner_env python=3.12.8 isorefiner
conda activate isorefiner_env
```
`python=3.12.8` is added to reduce a time to solve dependencies.

### Dependency
Required tools are listed in the [YAML file for conda](conda.yml). All of the required bioinformatics tools can be installed through the [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/) channel.

## Test
```bash
cd test/isorefiner
bash cmd.sh
```
A dataset and script are in the [test](test) directory. If you succeed in a test, `isorefiner_refined.gtf` is output. The test dataset was generated by a simulator, [SQANTI-SIM](https://github.com/ConesaLab/SQANTI-SIM).

## Quick start
```bash
isorefiner trans_struct_wf -r reads.fastq -g genome.fasta -a ref_annot.gtf -t 32
```
Above, IsoRefiner executes a workflow to refine transcript structures. Its subcommands are used internally. `reads.fastq` is a file of input long reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed). Multiple files can be specified as space-delimited string (e.g., "reads_1.fastq reads_2.fastq"). `genome.fasta` and `ref_annot.gtf` are the reference genome and annotation, respectively. The number of threads (parallelization) is `32` in this command. Final result is `isorefiner_refined.gtf`.

## Workflow command usage
The command below runs an end-to-end workflow, which uses [subcommands](#command-usage-for-each-step) internally. Although detailed parameters for internal steps can not be specified, it is convenient to run the workflow without preparing a complex shell-script. Intermediate files are in the directory named `isorefiner_{command}_work` (default) or `-d argument`, and a log file named `log.txt` is created in the same directory.
#
### trans_struct_wf
Workflow of transcript-structure refinement.
```
isorefiner trans_struct_wf [-h] -r [READS ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_refined.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_trans_struct_wf_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)

output: isorefiner_refined.gtf (-o argument)
```

## Command usage for each step
Each command below corresponds to a specific step used in the workflow. When specifing detailed parameters, it is suitable to execute these commands directly with options. The example step-by-step procedures are written in [step_by_step.sh](test/isorefiner/step_by_step.sh). Intermediate files are in the directory named `isorefiner_{command}_work` (default) or `-d argument`, and a log file named `log.txt` is created in the same directory.
### trim
Trim nanopore reads using [Porechop_ABI](https://github.com/bonsai-team/Porechop_ABI).
```
isorefiner trim [-h] -r [READS ...] [-o OUT_PREFIX] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-p TOOL_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_PREFIX, --out_prefix OUT_PREFIX
                        Prefix of final output files (extentions are those of input files) (default: isorefiner_trimmed)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_trim_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -p TOOL_OPTION, --tool_option TOOL_OPTION
                        Option for Porechomp_ABI (quoted string) (default: )

output: isorefiner_trimmed.fastq ({-o argument}.fastq)
  When multiple input files, isorefiner_trimmed_1.fastq isorefiner_trimmed_2.fastq ...
  File extentions are inherited from the input files.
```

### map
Map reads to the reference genome using [Minimap2](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2), and sort BAM files.
```
isorefiner map [-h] -r [READS ...] -g GENOME [-o OUT_PREFIX] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-m MM2_OPTION] [-s SORT_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_PREFIX, --out_prefix OUT_PREFIX
                        Prefix of output BAM files (default: isorefiner_mapped)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_map_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -m MM2_OPTION, --mm2_option MM2_OPTION
                        Option for minimap2 (quoted string) (default: -x splice -ub -k14 --secondary=no)
  -s SORT_OPTION, --sort_option SORT_OPTION
                        Option for samtools sort (quoted string) (default: -m 2G)

output: isorefiner_mapped.bam ({-o argument}.bam)
  When multiple input files, isorefiner_mapped_1.bam isorefiner_mapped_2.bam ...
```

### run_bambu
Run [Bambu](https://github.com/GoekeLab/bambu) (read mapping-based tool).
```
isorefiner run_bambu [-h] -b [BAM ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -b [BAM ...], --bam [BAM ...]
                        Mapped reads files (BAM, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_bambu.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_bambu_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)

output: isorefiner_bambu.gtf (-o argument)
```

### run_espresso
Run [ESPRESSO](https://github.com/Xinglab/espresso) (read mapping-based tool).
```
isorefiner run_espresso [-h] -b [BAM ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-s TOOL_S_OPTION] [-c TOOL_C_OPTION] [-q TOOL_Q_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -b [BAM ...], --bam [BAM ...]
                        Mapped reads files (BAM, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_espresso.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_espresso_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -s TOOL_S_OPTION, --tool_s_option TOOL_S_OPTION
                        Option for ESPRESSO_S.pl (quoted string) (default: )
  -c TOOL_C_OPTION, --tool_c_option TOOL_C_OPTION
                        Option for ESPRESSO_C.pl (quoted string) (default: )
  -q TOOL_Q_OPTION, --tool_q_option TOOL_Q_OPTION
                        Option for ESPRESSO_Q.pl (quoted string) (default: )

output: isorefiner_espresso.gtf (-o argument)
```

### run_isoquant
Run [IsoQuant](https://github.com/ablab/IsoQuant) (read mapping-based tool).
```
isorefiner run_isoquant [-h] -b [BAM ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-p TOOL_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -b [BAM ...], --bam [BAM ...]
                        Mapped reads files (BAM, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_isoquant.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_isoquant_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -p TOOL_OPTION, --tool_option TOOL_OPTION
                        Option for isoquant (quoted string) (default: --complete_genedb --data_type nanopore --stranded none --transcript_quantification unique_only
                        --gene_quantification unique_only --matching_strategy default --splice_correction_strategy default_ont --model_construction_strategy default_ont
                        --no_secondary --check_canonical --count_exons)

output: isorefiner_isoquant.gtf (-o argument)
```

### run_stringtie
Run [StringTie](https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/stringtie/) (read mapping-based tool).
```
isorefiner run_stringtie [-h] -b [BAM ...] [-g GENOME] -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [-p TOOL_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -b [BAM ...], --bam [BAM ...]
                        Mapped reads files (BAM, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_stringtie.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_stringtie_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  -p TOOL_OPTION, --tool_option TOOL_OPTION
                        Option for StringTie (quoted string) (default: )

output: isorefiner_stringtie.gtf (-o argument)
```

### run_rnabloom
Run [RNA-Bloom](https://github.com/bcgsc/RNA-Bloom) (de novo assembly-based tool) and GMAP (contig mapping).
```
isorefiner run_rnabloom [-h] -r [READS ...] [-g GENOME] [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [--max_mem MAX_MEM] [--rnabloom_option RNABLOOM_OPTION]
                               [--gmap_min_cov GMAP_MIN_COV] [--gmap_min_idt GMAP_MIN_IDT] [--gmap_max_intron GMAP_MAX_INTRON] [--gmap_option GMAP_OPTION]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_rnabloom.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_rnabloom_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  --max_mem MAX_MEM     Max memory for RNA-Bloom (java -Xmx) (default: 400g)
  --rnabloom_option RNABLOOM_OPTION
                        Option for RNA-Bloom (quoted string) (default: )
  --gmap_min_cov GMAP_MIN_COV
                        Min alignment coverage for GMAP [0-1] (default: 0.5)
  --gmap_min_idt GMAP_MIN_IDT
                        Min identity for GMAP [0-1] (default: 0.95)
  --gmap_max_intron GMAP_MAX_INTRON
                        Max intron length for GMAP (bp) (default: 100000)
  --gmap_option GMAP_OPTION
                        Option for GMAP (quoted string) (default: -n 1 --no-chimeras)

output: isorefiner_stringtie.gtf (-o argument)
```

### filter
Filter transcript isoforms (GTF format).
```
isorefiner filter [-h] -i INPUT_GTF -r [READS ...] -g GENOME [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [--max_indel MAX_INDEL] [--max_clip MAX_CLIP] [--min_idt MIN_IDT]
                         [--min_cov MIN_COV] [--min_mean_depth MIN_MEAN_DEPTH]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i INPUT_GTF, --input_gtf INPUT_GTF
                        Input transcript isoform structures (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_filtered.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_filter_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  --max_indel MAX_INDEL
                        Max indel for read mapping (default: 20)
  --max_clip MAX_CLIP   Max clip (unaligned) length for read mapping (default: 200)
  --min_idt MIN_IDT     Min identity for read mapping [0-1] (default: 0.9)
  --min_cov MIN_COV     Min coverage for filtering [0-1] (default: 0.95)
  --min_mean_depth MIN_MEAN_DEPTH
                        Min mean coverage depth for filtering (default: 1.0)

output: isorefiner_filtered.gtf (-o argument)
```

### refine
Merge and refine transcript isoforms.
```
refine [-h] -i [INPUT_GTF ...] -r [READS ...] -g GENOME -a REF_GTF [-o OUT_GTF] [-d WORK_DIR] [-t THREADS] [--max_indel MAX_INDEL] [--max_clip MAX_CLIP]
                         [--min_idt MIN_IDT] [--intron_dist_th INTRON_DIST_TH]

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i [INPUT_GTF ...], --input_gtf [INPUT_GTF ...]
                        Input transcript isoform structures (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -r [READS ...], --reads [READS ...]
                        Reads (FASTQ or FASTA, gzip allowed, mandatory) (default: None)
  -g GENOME, --genome GENOME
                        Reference genome (FASTA, mandatory) (default: None)
  -a REF_GTF, --ref_gtf REF_GTF
                        Reference genome annotation (GTF, mandatory) (default: None)
  -o OUT_GTF, --out_gtf OUT_GTF
                        Final output file name (GTF) (default: isorefiner_refined.gtf)
  -d WORK_DIR, --work_dir WORK_DIR
                        Working directory containing intermediate and log files (default: isorefiner_refine_work)
  -t THREADS, --threads THREADS
                        Number of threads (default: 1)
  --max_indel MAX_INDEL
                        Max indel for read mapping (default: 20)
  --max_clip MAX_CLIP   Max clip (unaligned) length for read mapping (default: 200)
  --min_idt MIN_IDT     Min identity for read mapping [0-1] (default: 0.9)
  --intron_dist_th INTRON_DIST_TH
                        Intron distance threshold to exclude erroneous isoforms (default: 20)

output: isorefiner_refined.gtf (-o argument)
```
